Dear Dr Daniel Rigden,

We would like the opportunity to submit our Prostate Integrative Expression Database (PIXdb) to the Web Server Issue of Nucleic Acids Research 2019.

The broad impact of new discoveries driven by international coordinated efforts, such as The Cancer Genome Atlas (TCGA) (1) and International Cancer Genome Consortium (ICGC) (2), have proven that generating and sharing genome-scale data from large cohorts of patients processed in unified way accelerates the pace of cancer research. While these initiatives provide unprecedented insights into expression alterations associated with primary tumours, the scarcity of studies comprehensively profiling premalignant and advanced disease, and lack of collective overview of these datasets limits their full explorative potential, e.g. for identification of early-detection and risk-stratification biomarkers or elucidation of molecular mechanisms associated with cancer progression. This is also the case of prostate cancer (PC), the second most common male cancer and the fifth leading cause of cancer-related death in men (3). Currently, there are no repositories providing an integrative view of multiple PC stages. Moreover, lack of systematic quality checks of raw data and associated clinical metadata significantly limits their reproducibility and integrative potential (4,5). To fill this gap, we performed cross-platform analysis using high-quality prostate cancer transcriptomics data from various microarray and next-generation sequencing (NGS) technologies and interfaced the results through a web-accessible PIXdb, the only resource dedicated for exploring and analysing integrated PC-related expression data. It contains 1,488 transcriptomics profiles from normal prostate and high-grade prostatic intraepithelial neoplasia (HGPIN) tissues, primary prostate cancer patients with and without metastasis, as well as samples from metastatic prostate cancer tissues. This largest multi-cohort collection of PC expression data provides the most complete picture of PC transcriptomic landscape readily available to researchers for in-depth exploration of expression patterns in the context of the disease natural history.

PIXdb offers the unprecedented opportunity to access an analytical layer from which users can explore 18 comprehensive PC-related studies in isolation or as an integrated dataset with the possibility to track and link molecular events across different PC development and progression stages. User-friendly interface promotes easy navigation of the explorative and analytical features for conducting intuitive biological queries by both computation biologist as well as bench and clinical researchers. It contains three components reflecting the underlying integrative analysis framework. The per-dataset and per-platform components contain a wide range of (1) exploratory features, including principal component analysis (PCA), estimation of tumour purity and whole-genome view of expression across various biological groups, as well as (2) analytical modules, such as expression profiling, correlation, survival and gene network analyses, which are performed on the fly based on user-specific query. The cross-platform component provides compendium of molecular events observed across different PC development and progression stages. It summarises information about cross-platform fold-change values and p-values with corresponding gene rankings according to the evidence for differential expression derived from all datasets. The autocomplete feature allows PIXdb users to browse the gene data without searching for a specific entry and the analytical and visualisation layers based on pre-processed data reduce the response times. The results are presented in an interactive format allowing users to visualize the annotate data points, zoom in/out the area of interest, exclude/include subgroups in the data, and download as static image files of publication quality. Summary tables are presented in an interactive tabular format with filtering, pagination, and sorting options, and are available for download in multiple formats.

Given the lack of systematic quality assessment of expression data in most public repositories, we set rigorous quality control as paramount to ensure robustness of the data integration and reproducibility of the results. Therefore, the manually curated high-throughput expression datasets included in PIXdb were (1) restricted to data derived from comprehensive commercial platforms bound to standardised protocols and (2) subjected to rigorous multi-level quality control checks. This involved samples filtering based on cluster analysis and tumour content estimation, as well as unreliable probes filtering, followed by batch effect assessment and reproducibility estimation for the cross-platform data integration step.

By integrating the large-scale data from international cancer initiatives with datasets available in public repositories we maximise their potential and fulfil their assumptions of being the foundation for research on modelling of cancer molecular makeup. The primary rationales for developing PIXdb were to (1) allow wide scientific community to further explore this largest collection of high-quality PC-related expression data and support individual groups research, (2) aid in designing future studies and (3) serve as a resource for in silico cross-validation of potentially important molecular events in the context of PC natural history, before performing expensive and time-consuming experiments. We believe that this will accelerate clinical research as well as basic science, and ultimately will facilitate unveiling important molecular mechanisms underlying PC and identification of genuine biomarkers for diagnosis and prognosis of this common cancer. Moreover, the PC-related expression data within PIXdb can aid researches focused on other cancer types in linking the candidate molecular events with various disease stages in the corresponding tumours and directing further investigation.

While PIXdb is dedicated for exploring and analysing integrated PC-related transcriptomics data, we anticipate that over time this framework will encourage initiation of databases on other cancers, for which genome-scale data from large cohorts of patients is publicly available.

PIXdb can be accessed at http://chs-mol-050/PIXdb/pages and the analytical framework used for cross-platform integrative analysis, including source code and associated documentation, is publicly accessible within GitHub repository https://pages.github.research.its.qmul.ac.uk/hfw456/transcriptomics_data_integration/.
We look forward to hearing from you, 

Regards
